Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. The spring and summer of 1982 is a bonanza
for science fiction fans. Never have there been so many good science fiction and
fantasy movies. It began in the spring with some lightweights, like The Cat
People, The Road Warriors, and The Sword and the Sorcerer. But then some real
blockbusters began appearing in the theaters and creating long lines of
moviegoers. These heavyweights would include Conan, the De Laurentiis
production of Robert E. Howard's barbarian hero. And then two from Steven
Spielberg, the horror fantasy film Poltergeist and the incredibly popular E.T.
Then there was Star Trek II, The Wrath of Khan, a solid production that captured
the essence of the television series. Ridley Scott's Blade Runner was released
in mid-summer, around the same time that John Carpenter's science fiction horror
film, The Thing, came out. And Tron. Walt Disney's landmark computer-animated
spectacle brought millions to the theaters. The science fiction radio show spoke
recently with a nationally known movie critic, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun
-Times, about science fiction in the cinema. For a number of years, Ebert and
his partner Gene Siskel have done a 30-minute television show, Sneak Previews,
for PBS. This year, however, they produced a one-hour show for commercial
television that's doing quite well. It's called At The Movies. We asked Ebert if
there was any reason for the great popularity of science fiction movies, and the
large number of them, during the summer of 1982. Yeah, I think that one reason
is that science fiction movies are finally getting the special effects that are
equal to their content. When you would read a science fiction book, you would be
able to imagine astonishing things happening. But then when you would go to the
movie, especially, let's say, in the 1950s, when there was the last big science
fiction boom, you would see some pretty transparently awful special effects in
most of the movies. And there were some good ones, some of George Pal's
productions, for example. But for the most part, the special effects were
laughable. And so the movies were not able to do justice to the ideas and the
material. These new science fiction films, starting with, well, obviously
starting with 2001 and then with Silent Running, which were precursors of the
current boom and which for a long time were not followed by any other notable
science fiction films, these new films are able to harness enough technology so
that the visuals can do justice to the ideas.
In some ways, the recent boom in science fiction and fantasy films makes it
difficult to judge which ones are the best. Right. In a way, the movie fan is
like a child on Christmas morning with a large number of presents around him.
It's too much too fast and he doesn't know which toy to turn to. It will take a
while to gain perspective on the summer of 1982. But we asked Ebert about the
future of science fiction in the movies. Will the popularity of science fiction
drop off, as it did after the science fiction movie boom of the 1950s? This is a
different kind of boom than the 50s boom. For the most part, with the exception
of movies like Fantastic Planet and Destination Moon, the 50s science fiction
boom was a B-movie boom. Most of those pictures were made for double features or
for drive-ins. A lot of them were made by American International on a very low
budget. They were exploitation pictures. The movies that are being made today
are among the all-time top-grossing films ever made, indicating a really deep
-seated desire on the part of the audience to go see them. Another difference is
that in the 50s, to a degree, even though television was around in the 50s, to a
degree, the American people were still going to movies out of habits that they
brought over from the pre-television era. Today, the basic moviegoer is 19 years
old, and more than half of all moviegoers are under the age of 25. So you have
different demographics in the audience, and these younger people have
traditionally been more interested in science fiction. So that I think that the
big-budget science fiction blockbuster is going to continue to be a phenomenon
indefinitely. We'll continue our conversation with film critic Roger Ebert next
time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. We're talking with Roger Ebert, the film
critic of the Chicago Sun-Times and co-host of the television show at the
movies. Ebert's criticism demonstrates a real knowledge of science fiction, and
he communicates a genuine appreciation of the field on his television show. In
fact, we suspect that he might have been a science fiction fan, so we asked him
if he grew up reading science fiction. Yeah, I got some old copies of Astounding
and FNSF and Galaxy from a couple of college students who are on my paper route.
They gave me about 900 old magazines, which I still have. So I have volume on
number one of a lot of different, you know, in the first year of FNSF and so
forth. So I started reading in, probably in fifth grade. And through high
school, I contributed to fanzines, and I even published a few issues of my own
fanzine. I went to, I think, one science fiction convention. Met Harlan Ellison
and Buck and Juanita Coulson. The summer of 1982 witnessed the greatest
explosion of good science fiction movies ever, with huge moneymakers like E.T.,
Poltergeist, Star Trek II, and Tron. And E.T. is on its way to being the
greatest moneymaker in Hollywood history. We asked Ebert if the movie is as good
as the money it's taken in indicates. The money that E.T. has taken in indicates
the nature of the market today. It was a mass market, very popular family
entertainment that came out at summertime with more than 1,000 theaters at some
point playing the film. And so it can generate revenues like that because of the
nature of the market. The movie is very good, and I loved it. And I think it
belongs on the same list, though, not so much with science fiction movies as
with movies like National Velvet, Lassie Come Home, movies about, as many other
people have also observed, it's kind of a movie about a boy and his dog, in a
way. It's more that than science fiction. I mean, technically, of course it's
science fiction, but I think the appeal was not because it was science fiction.
The appeal was because of our identification with this little boy and something
that he learns to care for and something that we learn to care for. The director
of E.T., Steven Spielberg, had another smash hit during the summer of 1982,
Poltergeist. Poltergeist is really a horror movie, a thriller with some tense
and frightening scenes in it. But the fright doesn't stick with you when you
leave the theater. You feel good somehow, even uplifted. Ebert speculates on
what Spielberg's got that has captured people's imagination. Spielberg has the
ability to remember what it was like to be a child. When I see his movies, and
I'm also including something, for example, like Raiders of the Lost Ark, I am
taken back to the feeling that I had when I would read pulp science fiction
serials in magazines like Thrilling Wonder Stories, Startling Stories, and so
forth, and stuff by Haggard and Burroughs and people like that. He remembers
that sense of wonder. And he also remembers what it was like to be a kid. I
think it's interesting that so many of his films have as their locale the
American suburbs. And he grew up in a suburb, and you see that suburb in
Poltergeist in particular, and in E.T.
The monetary success of E.T. and Poltergeist makes us wonder about the quality
of science fiction movies in general. We asked Ebert if it were possible for the
quality of a science fiction movie to be as high as that of the great all-time
movie classics. Certainly. The British film magazine, Sight and Sound, takes a
poll of the world's film critics every ten years to see what are the greatest
films of all time. They've done it in 52, 62, 72, and they're in the process of
doing it again now. And I fully anticipate that when the tallies are added up,
2001 will be included among the ten greatest films ever made. We'll have some
more with Roger Ebert next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Among the science fiction movies that came
out in the summer of 1982 were Blade Runner and The Thing. Neither movie was as
successful as its makers anticipated, though part of the reason for that would
have to be the science fiction competition during the summer. Blockbusters like
E.T., Poltergeist, and Tron. Blade Runner was a beautifully produced movie about
the near future, during a time when artificial humans, or androids, can be
created. We asked Roger Ebert, film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times and co-host
of the television show At The Movies, if there was any particular reason for the
failure of Blade Runner to make a larger splash. I think the reason for that is
that the director never really got interested in the people or androids and his
plot. And the movie was a triumph of set design. It looked great. It was a very
interesting-looking vision of the future. And in particular, the notion that,
you know, in so many movies or books, at least in, you know, we're not talking
about maybe people who are really familiar with the whole field of science
fiction, but to the general public, the science fiction future is this wonderful
stainless steel and form like a place with towers and rockets jetting around and
everybody dressed like a hospital intern and so forth. And this movie had the
imagination to suggest that 40 years from now, things are going to be 40 years
older. The pollution is going to be 40 years worse. Poverty is going to be 40
years more deeply ingrained. Crime will be 40 years more ubiquitous and so
forth. That was a very interesting vision. I do feel, though, that the really
interesting thing about Blade Runner and probably about the Philip K. Dick
material that it started from was centered around the question of what is human,
you know. If the memories that I have are not of a life that I live, does that
make them any less my memories? And Harrison Ford, when I interviewed him, said
much the same thing, that that's what attracted him to the material. The dilemma
of which of these people were human and which of these people were not is, as
far as their minds were concerned, they all had the same kind of background to
call on. And I think that that theme kind of got lost in the middle of those
great special effects. And if the movie had really been willing to follow
through on the value questions that it raised, it might have been a more
interesting movie. Now, the irony is that I think that one of the reasons it
wasn't as successful as it might have been is because it didn't follow through
on those questions. And yet, from what I understand, that material was cut out
of the movie because they figured it wouldn't be box office. It's better just to
have the special effects.
The Thing was the second Hollywood production of John W. Campbell's classic
short story, Who Goes There? It was done by John Carpenter, who specializes in
horror movies, his best being Halloween. We asked Ebert about his views on the
movie. Well, it really had an interesting monster. But it didn't really have
people. Yet I didn't really feel much concern about the characters in the thing.
And another thing that bothered me, you know, years ago in science fiction
fandom, they had the so-called idiot plot. The plot that can only last as long
as the movie because everyone in the movie is an idiot. Because if somebody was
an idiot, they would figure out what to do and do it. And in the thing, the
characters have an annoying, persistent tendency to not do what everyone in the
audience knows they should be doing. You know, they split up. They go outside.
They say, You stay right here because I know I can take care of myself. They
trust each other. They do not keep a census of who was where, when, and why. In
a group of people like that with military discipline, the moment that they
figured out what they were up against, if they had instilled watertight
discipline upon themselves, they would have been a lot better off. But the movie
depends upon everybody being an idiot. Next time, we'll continue our talk with
film critic and science fiction fan Roger Ebert.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Horror and fantasy are two movie categories
that are closely related to science fiction, and they've both been very popular
in the last year or so. And the popularity of both of them, as with science
fiction, reflects something found in our present society. We spoke recently with
Roger Ebert, film critic and science fiction fan, about the popularity of the
field. We asked him if the science fiction movie boom reflects our concern with
the space program and our desire to get off the Earth before we ruin or destroy
it. No, I don't think so. I think maybe some of the fascination with 2001 might
have been because it came out at a time when amazing things were happening in
space and we were getting ready to land on the moon and so forth. But I believe
that the space movies today, like Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back, are
identified with primarily in the same way that Raiders of the Lost Ark is, as a
picaresque adventure. And when we talk about science fiction, I gather that you
and I both kind of tacitly did not include horror films. I think a psychiatrist
might say something like this, or at least I've heard this theory. It's not so
much that the space films indicate our feeling that there's a new frontier to be
conquered, as that the monster films indicate our fear of technology. And there
is an old theory that at any time when mankind in recent years, in the 20th
century, when people, when the public has started to feel threatened by the bomb
or by technology, then you get a lot of horror pictures because the message
seems to be science will get out of control. Science will kill us. There'll be
some kind of a virus or giant grasshoppers or something will happen. And, you
know, scanners or other terrible things will be unleashed upon the population.
Ebert dislikes one particular aspect of current horror movies. I'll tell you one
thing that's happening. I'm getting awfully bored by the special effects makeup.
You know, it's only been about 18 months since the big breakthroughs of,
oh, like American Werewolf in London and so forth. And already you can, you
know, you get the close-up of the face and the jaw begins to pulsate and then
the face begins to expand and there's a face inside trying to get out. I've seen
it now, you know. I've seen it so many times that it's boring. I want to get on
with the story.
Fantasy, as distinguished from science fiction, is also currently popular with
movies like The Sword and the Sorcerer, Beastmaster, The Cat People, and
Dragonslayer. We asked Ebert if the quality of fantasy could equal that of
current science fiction. Well, the problem with fantasy is that, you know,
science fiction is allegedly plausible. Although we could have a lot of
questions about how much, for example, of Star Wars is really plausible. Fantasy
is not supposed to be plausible. But the problem is most fantasy movies seem to
be limited to sword and sorcery, types of, you know, Conan the Barbarian, The
Sword and the Sorcerer, and movies like that. Or you get an animated film like
Lord of the Rings. I have not seen very much of the kind of fantasy, for
example, the fantasy in science fiction magazine helped to popularize. Fantasy
in that it has to do with the whimsy of magic or impossible things intruding
into real life. Those kinds of movies are hard to do. And it takes a lot of
nerve to do them. It's one thing to have some broad falling out of her leopard
-skin bikini and some big brute with a sword, you know, and the rippling
pectorals and so forth. But it's another thing to have the imagination to really
create a fantasy.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. In the late 1930s, science fiction was in
transition. In one sense, it was becoming more sophisticated, outgrowing its
early emphasis on space opera. Jack Williamson, who wrote space opera, considers
this change natural. I was growing up and the readers were growing up. That's
something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American science
fiction all along. I think you can draw a distinction between, let's say,
European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand, which has always been
recognized and treated as literature, and the pulp American science fiction,
which was looked down on. But as the readers of that grew older, some of them
started writing, some of them started editing magazines, most of them outgrew
science fiction, but some of them didn't. So there was a continual increase in
the education, the sophistication and so forth of the whole field. Among these
readers of pulp science fiction were a few who developed into those authors
whose work defined what science fiction would become in later years. These early
readers were people like Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, A.E. van Vogt, Theodore
Sturgeon, L. Sprague de Camp, Frederik Pohl, and Hal Clement. And these authors
are now the classics, those who wrote in that very special period of science
fiction called The Golden Age. A.E. Van Vogt, looking back at that period, says
that he read the authors who were starting out then with him, but that he had no
idea they were doing anything special. Well, I read their stories. You know what
I mean? I was always fascinated by these various stories. I read every issue
that came out. So when you say, what was it like, it just seemed like a
perfectly natural thing that was happening. The notion that we were operating in
a special period of time did not occur to me. You know, I mean, we were just
doing our thing. And everybody was evidently stimulated in a special way.
Frederik Pohl belonged to a group of writers and fans in New York called the
Futurians. He remembers the closeness of the group and how they would help each
other. Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that
its readers heard together as much as they can. They form fan clubs and
associations and correspondence groups and so on. And in New York City, there
were quite a few science fiction fans. And about 25 or 30, most of whom wanted
to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians. There were people like Cyril
Kornbluth and Isaac Asimov and Damon Knight and myself, quite a few others. We
did discuss each other's work a lot. And I guess in the process of criticizing
it, there was a lot of help given. I think the biggest factor that made it
easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that other
people were doing it. And also the fact that we collaborated a lot. We remedied
each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean, by collaborating on single
stories. And although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn
something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were
writing about. L. Sprague de Camp also remembers this closeness among writers at
the beginning of the Golden Age. But like Van Vogt, de Camp says that the
authors had no sense of participating in anything special. Well, I dare say that
various ones of us did have their dreams and fancies at times and wondered how
it was all going to come out. And would this become, would the genre expand and
take over the mainstream and various things of that sort? But as to that, mostly
it was, as I said, it was simply a matter of making a living. But the living
those young writers made is the foundation of today's science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.